# zig-gobject

Bindings for GObject-based libraries (such as GTK) generated using GObject
introspection data.

## Usage

To use the bindings, find the [latest release of this
project](https://github.com/ianprime0509/zig-gobject/releases) and add the
desired bindings artifact as a dependency in `build.zig.zon`. Then, the exposed
bindings can be used as modules. For example:

```zig
const gobject = b.dependency("gobject", .{});
exe.root_module.addImport("gtk", gobject.module("gtk4"));
exe.root_module.addImport("adw", gobject.module("adw1"));
```

The binding generator and generated bindings are tested on Zig 0.15 and master,
though support for the latest master may temporarily regress when breaking
changes are made upstream.

## Companion projects

- [zig-libintl](https://github.com/ianprime0509/zig-libintl) - libintl bindings
  for Zig, which provide `gettext` functions for internationalization.
- [Nonograms](https://github.com/ianprime0509/nonograms) - a full application
  written using these bindings.

## Examples

There are several examples in the `example` directory, which is itself a
runnable project (depending on the `bindings` directory as a dependency). After
generating the bindings, the examples can be run using `zig build run` in the
`example` directory.

## Development environment

The bindings generated by this project cover a wide variety of libraries, and it
can be annoying and inconvenient to install these libraries on a host system for
testing purposes. The best way to get a consistent environment for testing is to
use [Flatpak](https://flatpak.org/):

1. Install `flatpak`.
2. Install the GNOME SDK: `flatpak install org.gnome.Sdk//48`

The steps above only need to be done once per GNOME SDK version. To enter a
development environment:

1. Run `flatpak run --filesystem=home --share=network --share=ipc --socket=fallback-x11 --socket=wayland --device=dri --socket=session-bus org.gnome.Sdk//48`
   - `--filesystem=home` - makes the user's home directory available within the
     container
   - `--share=network` - allows network access (needed to fetch `build.zig.zon`
     dependencies)
   - `--share=ipc --socket=fallback-x11 --socket=wayland --device=dri` - allows
     graphical display through X11 or Wayland
   - `--socket=session-bus` - allows access to the session bus
   - For convenience, this command is available as a script in this repository:
     `flatpak-env.sh`.
2. Within the spawned shell, you can use the latest master version of Zig
   downloaded from ziglang.org. Since the downloaded Zig is statically linked,
   it is usable within the Flatpak environment with no additional setup.

## Running the binding generator

The binding generator can be invoked using `zig build codegen`, which accepts
several useful options and is described further below, or by building the
`translate-gir` binary using `zig build` and invoking it directly.

`zig build codegen` requires a set of modules to be used as input. The input
modules can be specified using `-Dmodules` to provide an explicit list of root
modules for codegen (the codegen process will also discover any necessary
dependencies): for example, `zig build codegen -Dmodules=Gtk-4.0` will generate
bindings for GTK 4 and anything else it depends on (Gio, GObject, GLib, and many
others).

Alternatively, if a Flatpak development environment is set up (see the section
above), a predefined GIR profile can be selected using `-Dgir-profile`, which
includes all the modules available in a specific GNOME SDK. The predefined
profiles track the latest two GNOME releases.

GIR files are assumed to be located in `/usr/share/gir-1.0` unless this is
overridden via `-Dgir-files-path`.

The bindings are generated to the `bindings` directory under the build prefix
(by default, `zig-out`).

### Fixing broken GIR files

Sometimes, there are errors in GIR files which result in incorrect or incomplete
bindings. The codegen process can handle this via XSLT stylesheets, which are
named after the modules whose GIR files they correct. This project maintains
stylesheets fixing known GIR issues in `gir-fixes`.

The XSLT stylesheets are applied using the `xsltproc` program, which is part of
the libxslt project. At this time, this is a system command dependency; there is
no support yet for building xsltproc from source due to
https://github.com/ianprime0509/zig-libxml2/issues/1

### Writing bindings by hand

While the binding generator is capable of generating good bindings from GIR
input, it is sometimes necessary or desirable to bypass GIR for everything
except build-related metadata (library dependencies, etc.) and write Zig
bindings by hand. This is the strategy taken for Cairo, using the Cairo bindings
in `binding-overrides`.

Any manual binding files present in `binding-overrides` will cause codegen of
bindings to be skipped for the corresponding modules, using the manual bindings
instead.

## Running tests

`zig build test` will run the binding generator's tests. If bindings have been
generated, the `test` project directory contains a package depending on them
which runs tests on the generated bindings. The `zig build test` command in the
`test` project accepts the same `modules` and `gir-profile` options as the
codegen command to specify which modules to test (unlike codegen, the `modules`
option here specifies a complete list of modules to test: there is no discovery
and testing of dependency modules).

## Further reading

- [Binding strategy](./doc/binding-strategy.md)

## License

This project is released under the [Zero-Clause BSD
License](https://spdx.org/licenses/0BSD.html). The libraries exposed by the
generated bindings are subject to their own licenses.
